## Where does Alf come from ?

I wrote my master thesis in 2002-2003; it was already about object-relational mapping (ORM) and the so-called "impedence mismatch" between object-oriented programming languages and relational databases. At that time, Hibernate was not yet the de-facto mapper in the Java world, Rails/ActiveRecord did not even exist and the associated pattern, by Martin Fowler, just appeared.

I've been suggested the reading of The Third Manifesto ([the book](http://www.amazon.com/Databases-Types-Relational-Model-3rd/dp/0321399420), first edition, by Hugh Darwen and C.J. Date), which quickly appeared to me as conveying some kind of "scientific truth" about the topic. Roughly, ORMs prone the horizontal decomposition of types in SQL tables (class = table) where a sound analysis would quickly lead considering a vertical decomposition as the sound way to go (class = domain); doing so would require proper support for user-defined types, that SQL does not have (among numerous other defects).

I've spent the next years reading about Date and Darwen's Dream (having a truly relational language, called a "D", as a drop-in replacement for SQL; a far broader topic than the ORM stuff, I must add), reading most of their books and enjoying their research. During the same years, I've seen the advent of object-relational mapping... 

I've met people with development habits that value hundreds or thousands of buggy lines of code where five lines of SQL make the job, habits that strongly hurt data independence, restrict query expressiveness by orders of magnitudes, hurt scalability to such an extent that today's clouds are definitely adequate and even required for even the smallest website; I've seen, I swear, a single developer with strong database and SQL skills being replaced by an entire team of about 10 members, each of them being probably paid ten times what the former was paid, using the best technologies that the web 2.0 has seen,... but not able to develop, in an entire month, the ridiculous billing feature than the former had crafted in about two days.

I've repaired numerous databases built by those developers who sincerely think that "constraints must be checked at the application level"; the same who, at the same time, write buggy applications (I do) and bypass the "application level" for specific needs; As a consultant, I've built one specific system whose main feature was the extraction of noisy data from a professional ERP written on top of Oracle, their semi-automated cleaning and injection into a fresh new database written in... Microsoft Access. The delay needed by the IT service for implementing one single report on top of Oracle was about 6 weeks. The analysis and implementation of 35 statistical reports using the OLAP and reporting features of Access took about one fulltime week. Is that a dream or a nightmare? I ask.

Like all of us, I've heard about so numerous attempts to replace the relational model by something "more powerful", often XML, Objects, Web semantics and NoSQL solutions... without much success, I must add.

I've been tempted to start the implementation of such a "D" language many times. My rather limited low-level programming skills have always cooled me. Implementing a D is a huge task, which deserves and requires talented developers with strong skills about language design and implementation... that I simply do not have myself. So, I've been waiting; [Blogging a bit](http://revision-zero.org/logical_data_independence) about database-related stuff; Reading and participating to discussions about TTM and D; Sometimes writing [TTM-inspired libraries](http://github.com/blambeau) and other software pieces; and so on.


